# Pump It Up 
 
Dataset: https://www.drivendata.org/competitions/7/pump-it-up-data-mining-the-water-table/

Can you predict which water pumps are faulty?

Using data from Taarifa and the Tanzanian Ministry of Water, can you predict which pumps are functional, which need some repairs, and which don't work at all? This is an intermediate-level practice competition. Predict one of these three classes based on a number of variables about what kind of pump is operating, when it was installed, and how it is managed. A smart understanding of which waterpoints will fail can improve maintenance operations and ensure that clean, potable water is available to communities across Tanzania.

Abstractâ€” This paper explores the application of machine 
learning techniques to predict the operational status of water 
pumps in Tanzania. The dataset, sourced from the Taarifa 
waterpoints dashboard and the Tanzania Ministry of Water, 
contains detailed attributes of over 59,000 water points across 
various regions. Our study implements a robust methodology 
encompassing data preprocessing, exploratory data analysis 
(EDA), and the application of multiple classification 
algorithms. Preliminary data analysis revealed significant 
predictive potential in features such as geographical location, 
pump type, and management details. Data preprocessing steps 
included handling missing values, outlier correction, and 
feature engineering to enhance model accuracy. We applied 
several machine learning models including Random Forest, K
Nearest Neighbors (KNN), and Gradient Boosting Machines 
(XGBoost, LightGBM) to classify the operational status of the 
water pumps. The models were evaluated based on accuracy, 
precision, recall, and F1-score. The findings indicate that 
machine learning can significantly improve the predictability of 
water pump functionality, thereby aiding maintenance and 
management efforts. This study not only provides a framework 
for predictive maintenance in water resource management but 
also contributes to sustainable water service delivery in 
developing regions. 
